.. _pubkey/cmce:

Classic McEliece
================

Botan implements the Classic McEliece Key Encapsulation Mechanism (KEM) as defined in the
Round 4 NIST submission [CMCE-R4]_ and the ClassicMcEliece ISO Draft [CMCE-ISO]_. It
supports all parameter sets defined in both documents, listed
in Table :ref:`Supported Classic McEliece parameter sets <pubkey/cmce/parameter_table>`.

.. _pubkey/cmce/parameter_table:


.. table:: Supported Classic McEliece parameter sets (see [CMCE-ISO]_ Section 10 and [CMCE-R4]_ Section 7). ``<f>`` and ``<pc>`` indicate that sets with and without f and pc are supported.

   +----------------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+----------------------------+---------------------------------+
   | Parameter Set              | :math:`m` | :math:`n` | :math:`t` | :math:`f(z)`               | :math:`F(y)`                    |
   +============================+===========+===========+===========+============================+=================================+
   | ``mceliece348864<f>``      | 12        | 3488      | 64        | :math:`z^{12}+z^3+1`       | :math:`y^{64}+y^3+y+z`          |
   +----------------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+----------------------------+---------------------------------+
   | ``mceliece460896<f>``      | 13        | 4608      | 96        | :math:`z^{13}+z^4+z^3+z+1` | :math:`y^{96}+y^{10}+y^9+y^6+1` |
   +----------------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+----------------------------+---------------------------------+
   | ``mceliece6688128<pc><f>`` | 13        | 6688      | 128       | :math:`z^{13}+z^4+z^3+z+1` | :math:`y^{128}+y^7+y^2+y+1`     |
   +----------------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+----------------------------+---------------------------------+
   | ``mceliece6960119<pc><f>`` | 13        | 6960      | 119       | :math:`z^{13}+z^4+z^3+z+1` | :math:`y^{119}+y^8+1`           |
   +----------------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+----------------------------+---------------------------------+
   | ``mceliece8192128<pc><f>`` | 13        | 8192      | 128       | :math:`z^{13}+z^4+z^3+z+1` | :math:`y^{128}+y^7+y^2+y+1`     |
   +----------------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+----------------------------+---------------------------------+

.. _pubkey/cmce/key_generation:

Algorithm Internals
-------------------

The implementation of Classic McEliece is organized based on the algorithm's
operations and structures. Table :ref:`Classic McEliece components
<pubkey/cmce/component_table>` shows an overview of the components and
their corresponding file locations. Classic McEliece, like all Key Encapsulation
Mechanisms (KEMs), consists of three main algorithms: Key generation, key
encapsulation, and key decapsulation. In the case of Classic McEliece, the key
generation process involves creating a field ordering and an irreducible
polynomial. These two components define the randomly chosen Goppa code, the
secret information stored in the private key. A parity check matrix in
systematic form is derived from the Goppa code to generate the public key used
for encapsulation. More detailed information about these processes can be found
in the following sections.

.. _pubkey/cmce/component_table:

.. table:: Classic McEliece components and file locations. Its files are located at :srcref:`src/lib/pubkey/classic_mceliece/`.
   :widths: 21 29 40

   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   | Component                                              | File                                                             | Purpose                                                                    |
   +========================================================+==================================================================+============================================================================+
   | :ref:`Types <pubkey/cmce/types>`                       | :srcref:`[src/lib/pubkey/classic_mceliece]/cmce_types.h`         | Strong types                                                               |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   | :ref:`Galois Field Arithmetic <pubkey/cmce/gf>`        | :srcref:`[src/lib/pubkey/classic_mceliece]/cmce_gf.h`            | Galois field data structure and logic                                      |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   | :ref:`Field Ordering <pubkey/cmce/field_ordering>`     | :srcref:`[src/lib/pubkey/classic_mceliece]/cmce_field_ordering.h`| Field ordering creation and Beneš network computation                      |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   | :ref:`Polynomial Arithmetic <pubkey/cmce/poly>`        | :srcref:`[src/lib/pubkey/classic_mceliece]/cmce_poly.h`          | Polynomial data structure, logic, and minimal polynomial creation          |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   | :ref:`Bit Vector Arithmetic <pubkey/cmce/bitvector>`   | :srcref:`src/lib/utils/bitvector.h`                              | Representation of bit-vectors and bit-vector arithmetic                    |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   | :ref:`Matrix Operations <pubkey/cmce/matrix>`          | :srcref:`[src/lib/pubkey/classic_mceliece]/cmce_matrix.h`        | Binary matrix data structure, creation, and systematic form transformation |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   | :ref:`Key Pair <pubkey/cmce/keys_internal>`            | :srcref:`[src/lib/pubkey/classic_mceliece]/cmce_keys_internal.h` | Internal key pair container and key generation                             |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   | :ref:`Key Encapsulation <pubkey/cmce/encaps_internal>` | :srcref:`[src/lib/pubkey/classic_mceliece]/cmce_encaps.h`        | Encapsulation logic                                                        |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   | :ref:`Key Decapsulation <pubkey/cmce/decaps_internal>` | :srcref:`[src/lib/pubkey/classic_mceliece]/cmce_decaps.h`        | Decapsulation and decoding                                                 |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   | :ref:`Parameter Set <pubkey/cmce/params>`              | :srcref:`[src/lib/pubkey/classic_mceliece]/cmce_parameter_set.h` | Parameter set enum, parsing, and serialization                             |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   | :ref:`Parameters <pubkey/cmce/params>`                 | :srcref:`[src/lib/pubkey/classic_mceliece]/cmce_parameters.h`    | Classic McEliece parameter container                                       |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   | Classic McEliece                                       | :srcref:`[src/lib/pubkey/classic_mceliece]/cmce.h`               | Classic McEliece public and private key interface                          |
   +--------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+


.. _pubkey/cmce/types:

Types
^^^^^

In implementing Botan's Classic McEliece, strong types are utilized to
ensure the correct data usage within the code. These strong types are
fundamental to separate the domain of the various byte sequences involved in
Classic McEliece, such as multiple types of seeds, random byte sequences for different
algorithms, and bit-vectors with different semantic contexts. Specific integers,
like raw Galois Field elements and their modulus, are
also represented as strong types. This reliance on strong types is similar to using them
in other PQC algorithms for
similar reasons. The Classic McEliece implementation enhances readability,
clarity, and reliability by employing strong types.


..  _pubkey/cmce/gf:

Galois Field Arithmetic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Goppa code is based on the Galois field (GF) :math:`\mathbb{F}_{q}`, where :math:`q=2^m`.
Corresponding GF elements are represented by :math:`\mathbb{F}_{2}[z]/f(z)`,
which in Botan's implementation is realized via the class ``Classic_McEliece_GF``. Each
element is defined by two polynomials: one defines its value, and the other
defines the modulus of the field (:math:`f` in [CMCE-ISO]_). These values are
represented as unsigned integers where the bit on position :math:`i` is set if the
:math:`i`-th coefficient is 1. For example, the element :math:`z^3+z+1` is represented by
the unsigned integer ``0b1011``.

The GF elements support various operations such as addition, multiplication,
and inversion. These operations are implemented in constant time for operands
within the same field. Multiplication is performed using a constant-time
long multiplication algorithm with a consecutive constant-time reduction.
Inversion of an element :math:`a` is achieved using Fermat's little theorem:
:math:`a^{-1} = a^{q-2}`.
For that, exponentiation is implemented using a simple square-and-multiply
algorithm.

.. _pubkey/cmce/field_ordering:

Field Ordering
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Section 8.2 of [CMCE-ISO]_ defines the field ordering as a permutation
of elements in the Galois field :math:`\mathbb{F}_{q}`. This ordering is
required for generating a random sequence :math:`\alpha_0,...,\alpha_{n-1}` of distinct
:math:`\mathbb{F}_{q}` elements, which is necessary for creating the Goppa
code. Botan's ``Classic_McEliece_Field_Ordering`` serves as a container for the
field ordering and includes the algorithm to generate it. To sort the pairs
:math:`(a_i, i)` (as described in Step 3 of Section 8.2 in [CMCE-ISO]_), a
constant-time bitonic sort implementation is utilized. This sorting algorithm is
particularly suitable for sets with a power of two elements. The sorted
:math:`a_i` are then transformed into elements from :math:`\mathbb{F}_{q}` as
described in the final Steps 4-6 of Section 8.2 in [CMCE-ISO]_. The class
stores the resulting elements :math:`\alpha_0,...,\alpha_{q-1}` and provides
accessors.

Another vital role of the field ordering class is managing the Beneš network.
As Section 9.2.10 of [CMCE-ISO]_ outlines, the Beneš network stores the field
ordering as control bits in a compact form. Botan employs
a constant-time implementation of the ``controlbits`` algorithm presented in
Fig. 7.1 of [CBits]_ to create control bits and the ``permutation`` algorithm
to reconstruct the field ordering from given control bits. The creation
algorithm also utilizes constant-time bitonic sorting.


.. _pubkey/cmce/poly:

Polynomial Arithmetic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Classic McEliece algorithm uses elements of the polynomial ring
:math:`\mathbb{F}_q [y]` in multiple places, which are represented as
elements in :math:`\mathbb{F}_q [y] / F(y)`. Botan's
``Classic_McEliece_Polynomial`` class is used for this purpose.
One key application of this class is creating and representing
the irreducible polynomial :math:`g` for the Goppa code. Additionally, it is
used to represent the error locator polynomial used in the decapsulation process.

Internally, the polynomial class is composed of a vector of
``Classic_McEliece_GF`` elements, which act as the polynomial coefficients.
Also, the necessary functionality is provided to evaluate a
polynomial at a given point in :math:`\mathbb{F}_q`.

Polynomial arithmetic is required to obtain the monic irreducible polynomial
:math:`g` from a random seed, as
described in Step 3 of Section 8.1 in [CMCE-ISO]_. This arithmetic
is implemented in the ``Classic_McEliece_Polynomial_Ring`` class, representing
the polynomial ring :math:`\mathbb{F}_{q} [y]/F(y)` and supporting the
multiplication of two ``Classic_McEliece_Poly`` polynomials.

Following the recommendation of [CMCE-IMPL]_ Section 6.1,
the minimal polynomial is computed by finding a unique
solution to the equation :math:`g_0\beta^0 + ... + g_{t-1}\beta^{t-1} = \beta^t`.
A constant-time Gaussian elimination algorithm is used to solve this equation.
The algorithm aborts if the solution is non-unique. The minimal polynomial
is then represented as a ``Classic_McEliece_Minimal_Polynomial`` object, which
is a corresponding `Classic_McEliece_Polynomial` with additional logic
for serialization and deserialization as described in
Section 9.2.9 of [CMCE-ISO]_.


.. _pubkey/cmce/bitvector:

Bit Vector Arithmetic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Botan's ``bitvector`` class is a versatile tool for working with bits.
It is intended to be a general component for handling bit vectors in various
cryptographic contexts.
In the context of Classic McEliece, it was introduced to handle
binary matrices, error vectors, code words, and column selections.
The ``bitvector`` class provides a range of useful methods for these tasks.

A ``bitvector`` can be dynamically initialized with any length. It can be created
from a vector of bytes and serialized back to it, as described in Section 9.2.1
of [CMCE-ISO]_. The class allows for adding or removing bits, accessing and
manipulating individual bits, and obtaining specific properties of the vector,
such as the Hamming weight or checking if the vector is all-zero. Sub-vectors
can also be extracted from an existing ``bitvector``.

Furthermore, the ``bitvector`` class supports binary operations between two vectors
of the same length, including AND, OR, and XOR. These operations are optimized
for performance, especially in the context of Classic McEliece.

The design of the ``bitvector`` class supports many side-channel resistant
operations. The time taken for bit accesses and manipulations depends
only on the bit's position, not its value. Operations between two vectors
are also constant-time when the operands have the same length. Other helper
functions used in Classic McEliece, such as Hamming weight computation, are
also available with side-channel protection.
Botan's Classic McEliece implementation only uses the constant-time functionalities of ``bitvector``.


.. _pubkey/cmce/matrix:

Matrix Operations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Classic McEliece's key generation algorithm utilizes its Goppa code, defined by a
field ordering and a monic irreducible polynomial, to create a binary parity
check matrix :math:`H` in systematic form. This matrix is represented by the
``Classic_McEliece_Matrix`` class.

The class follows the process outlined in Section 7.2 of [CMCE-ISO]_ for matrix
creation. Initially, a binary :math:`mt \times n` matrix is created as
described in Steps 1 and 2 of Section 7.2.2. Each row of the matrix is
represented as a ``bitvector`` object. Subsequently, a constant-time Gauss
algorithm is applied to reduce the matrix to the systematic form :math:`H=(I_{mt}|T)`.
The algorithm achieves this by systematically applying XOR operations on pairs
of matrix rows, resulting in the identity matrix on the left. Finally, the
submatrix `T` is stored in the matrix object, mirroring its representation in
the public key specified in Section 9.2.7 of [CMCE-ISO]_.

Classic McEliece instances with the suffix ``f`` employ a semi-systematic transformation
strategy, utilizing the parameters :math:`(\mu, \nu) = (32, 64)`, as described
in Section 7.2.3 of [CMCE-ISO]_. Following the recommendation of [CMCE-IMPL]_
Section 6.1, a Gauss algorithm is executed
to create an identity matrix for the first :math:`mt-\mu` rows. Subsequently, a
modified Gauss algorithm achieves a reduced row-echelon form for
the :math:`\mu \times \nu` submatrix at position :math:`(\mu, \mu)`.
This process determines the column selection, i.e., the indices of the non-zero
columns. As Section 7.2.3 Step 5 of [CMCE-ISO]_ outlines, the matrix
columns and the field ordering are permuted according to the pivots. The main
Gauss algorithm concludes at this point, leaving the matrix in its modified
and systematic form.

For encoding, the matrix :math:`H` is multiplied by an error vector
:math:`e` as specified in Section 7.3 of [CMCE-ISO]_. This multiplication is
performed by computing the parity of the
Hamming weight of :math:`e\ \oplus\ r` for each row :math:`r` of :math:`H`.
Matrix creation and multiplication are implemented in constant time.


.. _pubkey/cmce/keys_internal:

Key Pair
^^^^^^^^

Botan's key pair for Classic McEliece consists of two classes:
``Classic_McEliece_PrivateKeyInternal`` and ``Classic_McEliece_PublicKeyInternal``.
As defined in Section 9.2.12, the private key stores the key generation seed,
column selection, monic irreducible polynomial, field ordering control bits,
and the seed for implicit rejection. The public key
contains the sub-matrix :math:`T` of the binary parity check matrix
:math:`H = (I_{mt}|T)`.

The class ``Classic_McEliece_KeyPair_Internal`` holds both the private and public
keys and contains the key generation method. Details are discussed in Section
:ref:`Key Generation <pubkey/cmce/key_gen>`.


.. _pubkey/cmce/encaps_internal:

Encapsulation Internals
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The class ``Classic_McEliece_Encryptor`` implements Botan's key
encapsulation interface. Performing encapsulation requires two building blocks:
Fixed weight vector creation and error vector encoding.

The algorithm described in Section 8.4 of [CMCE-ISO]_ is followed to create a
fixed weight error vector. Random elements :math:`d_0,...,d_{\tau-1}` are
generated, where the first :math:`t` elements smaller than :math:`n` are selected as
:math:`a_0,...,a_{t-1}`. Note that side-channels may leak the information about which
:math:`d_i` element is assigned to which :math:`a_j` element. However, this information
is insensitive since the contents of :math:`a_i` elements are not disclosed.
The selected values are translated to an error vector :math:`e` in constant time,
as described in Section 8.4 Step 5 of [CMCE-ISO]_.

For encoding, the parity check matrix :math:`H` is multiplied with :math:`e` as
Section :ref:`Matrix Operations <pubkey/cmce/matrix>` describes. The
encapsulation algorithm used in Botan is outlined in Section
:ref:`Key Encapsulation <pubkey/cmce/encapsulation>`.


.. _pubkey/cmce/decaps_internal:

Decapsulation Internals
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The class ``Classic_McEliece_Decryptor`` in Botan is responsible for
key decapsulation. One of the crucial steps in the decapsulation algorithm of
Classic McEliece is the decoding subroutine described in Section 7.4 of
[CMCE-ISO]_. This subroutine is implemented based on the recommendations
provided in Section 6 of [McBits]_. It utilizes Berlekamp's
algorithm for Goppa decoding.

To begin with, the code word :math:`C` that needs to be decoded is extended by
appending zeros. This results in a binary vector :math:`v = (C,0,\dots,0) \in \mathbb{F}_2^{n}`,
as Step 1 of Section 7.2 of [CMCE-ISO]_ defines. Subsequently, the syndrome for
Berlekamp's method is computed from :math:`v`. The syndrome is a vector given by
:math:`\left( \sum\nolimits_{i} \frac{v_i\alpha_i^0}{g(\alpha_i)^2},\dots,\sum\nolimits_{i} \frac{v_i\alpha_i^{n-1}}{g(\alpha_i)^2} \right)`,
where :math:`\alpha_i` are the first :math:`n` field ordering elements and
:math:`g` is the Goppa polynomial.

Next, an error locator polynomial :math:`\sigma` is computed using the
Berlekamp-Massey algorithm on the syndrome. The resulting polynomial has a
particular property that allows deriving the error vector :math:`e`.
Specifically, :math:`\sigma(\alpha_i) = 0` if and only if
:math:`e_i = 1`. By evaluating :math:`\sigma` at :math:`\alpha_0,\dots,\alpha_{n-1}`,
we can reconstruct the error vector :math:`e`.

To ensure accurate decoding, Botan follows the recommendation of [CMCE-IMPL]_ Section 6.3.
It computes the syndrome for the error
vector :math:`e` and compares it with the syndrome for :math:`v`. If the
comparison holds and the weight of :math:`e` is equal to :math:`t`, we consider
the decoding successful. Otherwise, it is flagged as a failure.

It is worth noting that the syndrome computation, Berlekamp-Massey algorithm, and
locator polynomial evaluation are implemented in constant time. Additionally,
the checks for the weight of :math:`e` and the syndrome comparison are designed
to avoid early abortion if any check fails. This ensures that no information about
the decoding success leaks.


.. _pubkey/cmce/params:

Parameters
^^^^^^^^^^

The ``Classic_McEliece_Parameter_Set`` enum contains all instances of the
Classic McEliece algorithm listed in Table :ref:`Supported Classic McEliece
Parameter Sets <pubkey/cmce/parameter_table>`. These parameter sets serve as
the basis for deriving all the necessary parameters used within the algorithm.
They are collected in a ``Classic_McElice_Parameters`` object, which includes
all the parameters defined in the specifications [CMCE-ISO]_ and [CMCE-R4]_.
This object is passed to all algorithm components, ensuring consistent
parameter usage.


.. _pubkey/cmce/key_gen:


Key Generation
--------------

Classic McEliece key generation follows Section 8.3 of [CMCE-ISO]_ and is
implemented within the ``Classic_McEliece_KeyPair_Internal`` class. It works as
follows:

.. admonition:: Classic McEliece Key Generation

   **Input:**

   -  ``rng``: random number generator

   **Output:**

   -  ``SK``, ``PK``: private and public key

   **Steps:**

   1. Generate a random value ``seed`` using ``rng``
   2. ``s, ordering_bits, irreducible_bits, next_seed = PRF(seed)``
   3. | Create a field ordering ``field_ordering`` using ``ordering_bits``
      | On failure, set ``seed = next_seed`` and go to step 2

   4. | Create a monic irreducible polynomial ``g`` using ``irreducible_bits``
      | On failure, set ``seed = next_seed`` and go to step 2

   5. | Create a parity check matrix in systematic form ``H = (I_mt | T)`` using ``field_ordering`` and ``g``. During this process, the column selection ``c`` is also computed.
      | On failure, set ``seed = next_seed`` and go to step 2

   6. ``SK = {seed, c, g, field_ordering, s}, PK = {T}``

   **Notes:**

   - ``PRG`` is an application of ``SHAKE256`` with an input prefix byte 64.
     The output length is ``n/8 + 4q + 2t + 32`` bytes. It is defined
     in Section 9.1 of [CMCE-ISO]_.
   - Only the first ``n`` elements of the field ordering are used to
     create the parity check matrix.
   - For instances with the suffix ``f``, the semi-systematic transformation
     strategy is employed. In this case, ``field_ordering`` is updated to
     reflect the column selection.
   - To store the private and public keys as bytes, the respective entries are
     serialized following the specifications of Section 9.2 of [CMCE-ISO]_.


.. _pubkey/cmce/encapsulation:

Key Encapsulation
-----------------

The Classic McEliece encapsulation procedure of Botan follows Section 8.5 of
[CMCE-ISO]_ and works as follows:

.. admonition:: Classic McEliece Encapsulation

   **Input:**

   - ``PK = {T}``: public key
   - ``rng``: random number generator

   **Output:**

   - ``encap_key``: ciphertext of shared key
   - ``shared_key``: plaintext shared key

   **Steps:**

   1. Generate a random error vector ``e`` of weight ``t`` using ``rng``
   2.  ``c0 = H * e`` to encode ``e`` where ``H`` is a ``Classic_McEliece_Matrix`` object
   3. Depending on whether the parameter set includes plaintext confirmation (suffix ``pc``):

       a. **Without pc:** ``encap_key = c0``
       b. **With pc:** ``c1 = Hash(2, e)``, ``encap_key = c0 || c1``

   4.  ``shared_key = Hash(1, e, encap_key)``

   **Notes:**

   - ``Hash`` is an application of ``SHAKE256`` with 32 output bytes as defined
     in Section 9.1 of [CMCE-ISO]_.
   - The creation of error vectors is a rejection sampling algorithm. For each
     iteration, the success probability is greater than 24%. To prevent a
     broken RNG leading to an endless loop, the algorithm is aborted after 203
     iterations. This value is chosen to ensure that the probability of
     aborting with a correct RNG is less than :math:`2^{-80}`.


.. _pubkey/cmce/decapsulation:

Key Decapsulation
-----------------

The Classic McEliece decapsulation procedure of Botan follows Section 8.6 of
[CMCE-ISO]_ and works as follows:

.. admonition:: Classic McEliece Decapsulation

   **Input:**

   -  ``SK = {seed, c, g, field_ordering, s}``: secret key
   -  ``encap_key``: encapsulated key bytes

   **Output:**

   -  ``shared_key``: shared key

   **Steps:**

   1. Depending on whether the parameter set includes plaintext confirmation (suffix ``pc``):

       a. **Without pc:** ``c0 = encap_key``
       b. **With pc:** ``c0, c1 = encap_key``, split after ``ceil(m*t/8)`` bytes

   2. | Decode ``c0`` to obtain ``e`` using Berlekamp's algorithm and set ``b = 1``
      | On failure set ``e = s`` and ``b = 0``

   3. | **Only for pc instances:** ``c1_p = Hash(2, e)``
      | If ``c1_p != c1`` set ``e = s`` and ``b = 0``

   4. ``shared_key = Hash(b, e, encap_key)``

   **Notes:**

   - ``Hash`` is an application of ``SHAKE256`` with 32 output bytes as defined
     in Section 9.1 of [CMCE-ISO]_.
   - The failure comparisons and assignments in steps 2 and 3 are implemented using
     Botan's constant-time helper functions to ensure constant-time execution.
